README.md, before:

# **LLM-based NER for (historical) lists: From semi-structured texts to structured data**
![list-banner](https://github.com/nrastinger/llm-assisted-list-analysis/blob/main/images/deco-banner-small.png?raw=true)
The Jupyter Notebook and files available here were initially created as part of a broader case study titled ["Visiting Vienna"](https://www.oeaw.ac.at/acdh/research/literary-textual-studies/research/linked-data-vienna-time-machine/visiting-vienna) that focused on **automatic information extraction from periodically published lists found in historical newspapers and advertising papers** (cf. [Rastinger 2024](https://doi.org/10.3384/ecp210016)). Specifically, it addressed the arrival lists published in the *Wien[n]erisches Diarium* from 1703 to 1725 and demonstrated how **Large Language Models (LLMs)** can be used for **Named Entity Recognition (NER)** to transform  historical semi-structured texts into structured data better suitable for analysis. With the idea of re-using this workflow for further (types of) lists, the Notebook has since been updated and further expanded. The case study was funded by the City of Vienna as well as through a ÖAW DOC fellowship. For feedback, questions or other inquiries, please e-mail [ninaclaudia.rastinger@oeaw.ac.at](mailto:ninaclaudia.rastinger@oeaw.ac.at).

Commit message:

major new version: switch from colab-support to binder-support
plus additional updates of notebook

README.md, after:

# **LLM-based NER for (historical) lists: From semi-structured texts to structured data**
![list-banner](https://github.com/nrastinger/llm-assisted-list-analysis/blob/main/images/deco-banner-small.png?raw=true)
The Jupyter Notebook and files available here were initially created as part of a broader case study titled ["Visiting Vienna"](https://www.oeaw.ac.at/acdh/research/literary-textual-studies/research/linked-data-vienna-time-machine/visiting-vienna) that focused on **automatic information extraction from periodically published lists found in historical newspapers and advertising papers** (cf. [Rastinger 2024](https://doi.org/10.3384/ecp210016), supported by the City of vienna and and an ÖAW DOC fellowship). Specifically, it addressed the arrival lists published in the *Wien[n]erisches Diarium* from 1703 to 1725 and demonstrated how **Large Language Models (LLMs)** can be used for **Named Entity Recognition (NER)** to transform  historical semi-structured texts into structured data better suitable for analysis. With the idea of re-using this workflow for further (types of) lists, the Notebook has since been updated and further expanded. A major part of the follow-up work was done in the context of the project ["KI-gestützte Rekonstruktion marginalisierter mobiler Gruppen: Semi-automatische Informationsextraktion aus frühneuzeitlichen Fremdenlisten"](https://www.uni-bremen.de/institut-fuer-geschichtswissenschaft/epochen-und-bereiche/fruehe-neuzeit/forschung/ki-gestuetzte-rekonstruktion-marginalisierter-mobiler-gruppen) at the University of Bremen, which deals with transfering the developed workflow to the arrival lists published in the *Regensburgisches Diarium* (RD).

For feedback, questions or other inquiries, please e-mail [ninaclaudia.rastinger@oeaw.ac.at](mailto:ninaclaudia.rastinger@oeaw.ac.at) or [nina.rastinger@univie.ac.at](mailto:nina.rastinger@univie.ac.at).

Use Notebook via Binder:
[![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/nrastinger/binder-test/main?urlpath=%2Fdoc%2Ftree%2FLLM-assisted-list-analysis.ipynb)
